---
issue: content/issues/HCERES.md
keywords: []
date: 2022-05-16T08:15:10Z
language: English
disciplines: ''
needDOI: true
published: false
article_title: " Not publish and survive: Less may be better in book publication"
authors:
- firstname: 'Geoffrey '
  lastname: Williams
  titles_and_institutions:
  - titles: []
    institution: Université Bretagne Sud, France
  picture: ''
  picture_copyright: ''
  social_channels:
    website: ''
    wikipedia: ''
    orcid_id: ''
    linkedin: ''
    twitter: ''
    instagram: ''
    google_scholar: ''
    researchgate: ''
    mendeley: ''
  reference: ''
custom_pdf: ''
abstract: |
  What are the benefits of writing a book with XXX? Within this email you can see a selection of some of our highlighted XXX book series and an invitation to contact us with your book idea. Publishing in a book series is one of the best ways to expand on your work. Writing a book for our XXX series can offer you more space—more breadth and depth—than a journal article. However, despite being an extremely rewarding experience, it can also be an intimidating task, which is why our experienced and expert Editors are here to help.
  Colloquium Evaluation of Social Sciences and Humanities in Europe Paris IAS, 16-17 May 2022 - Session 1 "Books in SSH research" - The Evaluation of books
picture: ''
picture_copyright: ''
yt: ''
highlight: false
bibliography: "/documents-exportes_114.bib"
doi: ''

---
Should I be flattered? No, I have no research competence in the fields proposed, I am simply on a list, as an English speaking academic. This is not even a parasite publisher, although I get these contacting me weekly. This is partly about academic publishing, and largely about ego boosting books. To me, this raises questions about academic publisher and the motives behind it.

Studies often repeat the mantra that the social sciences and humanities publish books, whereas the sciences publish in journals. Like all stereotypes, there is some truth, and books do hold considerable kudos in the humanities, and to a lesser extent in the social sciences. However, the real situation is far more complex and subject to a wide variety of disciplinary and institutional factors.

Here I wish to look at potential distortions in the system from recruitment and individual evaluation processes that require that academics in some disciplines face an obligation to produce books in order to get employment and promotion within academic environments. I shall refer to three types of published works: doctoral dissertations, conference proceedings and, to an extent, individual academic publications, but looking at motivations rather than the typologies we have already seen.

Within ENRESSH, we set up a subgroup which we termed in NBABE – non-Bibliometric approaches to book evaluation to look more closely at qualitative and policy issues that can underlie or result from use, or misuse, of bibliometric data, and to complement the ENRESSH bibliometric studies and draws on their findings. We need to know where and why people are publishing. This is vital if we want to get SSH researchers on board and if we want to go beyond the current situation where they can be both wary of evaluation, but still apply their own unwritten evaluation rules, without considering the consequences of the criteria they apply.

We know about publish or perish as a danger to quality outputs, but maybe we should also look more into the ‘not-publish-and-not-get-a-job’ syndrome because job seeking and promotion can be the only motive between behind publishing a book that very few people, apart from an evaluation committee will actually read.

Amongst issues NBABE highlighted, the question as to whether there are not simply too many books arose. If we look at the situation in academia both between and just after WWII, we can see that many of the great names in academia published very little, and yet their fame was assured and the books that they published were extremely influential in many cases. From the 60s on, the development of mass higher education meant the mass recruitment of lecturing and research staff, and this has increasingly led to intense competition between candidates, who need to have more substantial publication profiles. Recruitment is a market and creating a market inevitably meant the rise of pay-for-publish companies alongside the traditional university publishing presses. Whilst the latter might have strong quality criteria, the former are commercial enterprises that need to generate profits.

At this point, it must be said that one of the first tasks we must fulfil in book evaluation is defining what is a book. This may seem obvious, but as we have found in looking at ways researchers are fighting the system, it is not so. A book has an ISBN, and if it has an ISBN, it is a book is a circular argument: the amount of data, type of publication process and distribution of the product should be taken into account. Is it found in bookshops or libraries, and so do people actually read it? These are factors which become extremely obvious when trying to discuss books. I shall leave others to discuss further these issues, but as anyone who has reviewed recruitment profiles, particularly perhaps in the USA where tenure track positions are hard to find, will say, the pressure to publish a book is enormous.

For most young academics, their first document of book size is a thesis, and before even entering the job market, the need to publish a book arises. The question as to whether the candidate has published a thesis, or not, can come from recruitment panels, which fail to ask whether it is good to publish a thesis so soon after a viva. It is just a perceived norm.

It can be argued that ideally a thesis should be made available in open access so that they are readable in the drive to open science. If this is so, then evaluation systems should take this into account and not push people into publishing. The problem is that recruitment panels impose, and some publishers find this is a very lucrative system. Both leave the doctoral student to find the money, usually their own. In such a case, the evaluation system and disciplinary expectation must change.

This is not seeing open access as a lesser outlet, far from it, it is the first step to making people understand the value of open science.

Beyond the barriers for entering the system, we need to look at why are academics in some areas publish books?

There are obviously several answers to this question, but when talking to confirmed researchers using focus groups analysis, the answer was generally the desire to publish research that was beyond the size of a single article or of the book chapter. The motivation then is clearly dissemination of research which they perceive to be important. In this case the controlling factor is the selection procedure of the publishers themselves, basically with peer review, book collections, and knowing where the book will actually sell. A publisher should then ensure distribution of the book, and expect a return on investment. This was, and is, the situation for much academic publication.

One major area of publication is conference proceedings. A good conference is about bringing colleagues together, networking around a central theme, and making available what is being discussed is obviously essential in knowledge dissemination, but does this inevitably mean a book?

It is not a question of judging whether a conference is good or bad, but it is a question of

making the data available in a suitable format, and this within the perspective of open science. Here again, focus studies showed feedback showed that confirmed researchers clearly differentiate between conference proceedings and a book chapter which requires a great deal more revision and inclusion in thematically valid publications. It is the pressure to publish that means that proceedings can become disguised as collective works.

Given that motivations to publish may lead the use of pay-to-publish outlets purely to meet criteria that are not based so much on a need to disseminate knowledge but a need to bolster a CV we need to rethink policy. Changes in evaluation protocols should help, but quality controls and the requirement for genuine distribution networks could be key factors in judging outputs.

In making science available, open access is essential, and making available primary publication data – doctoral dissertations and conference proceedings - is a first start. Obviously, open access cannot be seen as the only means of publication and should not become a constraint. Commercial publishing will remain important, particularly in hybrid publishing where a work of academic value can also have a wide public appeal, as it often the case with history, and should not be denied. This means that evaluation systems must take into account the importance of hybrid publications, but also that criteria are needed to judge what material can enter an academic book database, and that wider distributed works also achieve recognition.

NBABE looked at issues, but ENRESSH is also about solutions. When judging a printed work quality is a dangerous phenomenon. What is good to one is not to another and only discipline specialists, and even then can judge validity of a publication. Maybe it is better to look at the publishers themselves to see what criteria they apply and whether they reach academic standards. Factors include looking at whether the publisher has valid peer review, whether there is an academically pertinent series editor, and whether the book will be actively distributed. Open access can take all these boxes and is obviously a way forward in many cases, provided we keep a close eye on exorbitant author publishing charges. The second issue is making sure that indicators are understood and not simply blindly applied, above all, policy statements are clear as to what the evaluation is about, and with no secret agenda. From an ENRESSH perspective, book evaluation is not about imposing models or disciplines, it is about looking at disciplines and rendering them more responsible, and thereby actually promoting the value of the social sciences and humanities. Book evaluation can never be seen separately from the global vision of what academia is about.

People play the system. The university is not us, if it ever was, and we cannot blame people for trying to survive a system imposed by technocrats who are overwilling to misuse bibliometric procedures. This is neither the fault of the researcher nor bibliometric sources, which of inestimable value if correctly used.

To sum up, one thing is certain is that it doesn’t matter how good your indicators are if you do not have people who understand evaluation and are not just ticking boxes. Evaluating requires research and thought as to the outcomes. It is applied policy mixed to policy applied.