---
issue: content/issues/HCERES - PFUE 2022.md
keywords: []
date: 2022-05-17T08:20:49.000+00:00
language: English
disciplines: ''
needDOI: true
published: false
article_title: Integration of SSH before, under and after the funding decision
authors:
- firstname: 'Jon '
  lastname: Holm
  positions_and_institutions:
  - positions: []
    institution: Research Council of Norway, Norway
  - positions: []
    institution: ENRESSH
  picture: ''
  picture_copyright: ''
  social_channels:
    website: ''
    wikipedia: ''
    orcid: ''
    linkedin: ''
    twitter: ''
    instagram: ''
    google_scholar: ''
    researchgate: ''
    mendeley: ''
  reference: ''
  is_institution: false
custom_pdf: ''
abstract: "Evaluation of Social Sciences and Humanities in Europe.\nHcéres Colloquium
  Proceedings - Paris IAS,  16-17 May 2022.\nSession 3 \"The Participation of SSH
  to European Research\" - The Evaluation of SSH in the European Research Programmes "
picture: ''
picture_copyright: ''
yt: ''
highlight: false
bibliography: ''
doi: ''

---
In my contribution today I would like to distinguish between three ways in which a research funder like the Research council of Norway or the European Commission can integrate the Social Sciences and the Humanities in its funding processes. I will discuss the status and potential of this integration at three phases of this process: before, under and after the funding decision. I will claim that the relation between societal goals and research priorities is different in each of these phases. This means that we need to think about the integration, or rather role, of SSH in different ways.

## Before the funding: SSH contribution to evidence-based research policies

A research council could be seen as representing the research communities towards policy-makers, but it could also be seen as a tool for policy-makers to implement research policies. In a well-functioning council the elevator should work both ways. The social sciences and humanities may contribute to the development and implementation of research policies in various ways.

Firstly, it is well known that SSH-research and especially social scientists play an important role in providing evidence for public policies. The tradition of evidence-based policies has been particularly strong in the Nordic countries leading to a relatively high share of public funding for research in the social sciences. This means that SSH should be in a good position to influence research policy by taking part in the identification and description of societal challenges. This observation stands in contrast to the relatively low share of SSH being funded through problem-oriented research programmes in the EU and even in Norway. Simply put, it seems that the SSH community is better at identifying and describing societal problems than convincing policy-makers that more SSH-research would solve those same problems.

So what could we do to convince policy-makers that investments in SSH will actually contribute to the solution of societal challenges and not only to understanding of them? Let me suggest two options: The first option is to do more of what SSH-researchers are good at, which is to take a critical approach to research policies by questioning its premises and the relation of means and ends. This is in line with the tradition for evidence-based policy-making, and has created the specialised field of research-on-research. By spending a small share of their budget on research-on-research, research councils around the world may enhance the precision and efficacy of their other investments.

Still, financing more research-on-research will not in itself lead to a better integration of SSH-research in EU framework programmes or other strategic research programmes. SSH-integration actually require that SSH-researchers to go beyond the investigation and understanding of societal challenges, and take on a more active part in investigating and understanding possible solutions in cooperation with other disciplines. And here we arrive at what might be a vicious circle for SSH-research. Because SSH have a low participation in the non-SSH parts of the European framework programme, relatively few SSH-researchers have the experience of working in large interdisciplinary teams.

## The funding decision: In between supply and demand

How to best integrate SSH-research in EU framework programmes has been a recurring question at least since SSH was included as a distinct priority in FP7. The challenges are well known and run through the whole cycle of call design, call implementation and project evaluation. The European commission's own report on the Integration of Social Sciences and Humanities in Horizon 2020[^1] shows a lack of actual co-design of calls and topics across the whole programme, a low awareness of SSH current research trends, and a lack of SSH expertise in proposal evaluations.

Seeing that the efforts of SSH-integration since FP7 have produced quite disappointing results, we need to look for new ways to mobilise SSH-research. The European Alliance for Social Sciences and the Humanities (EASSH) has proposed the following measures to boost SSH participation in Horizon Europe:[^2]

- a separate and strong cluster on societies

- a redefinition of the concept of integration,

- an enhanced participation of SSH academic experts

- a revised methodology for monitoring interdisciplinary integration

Such measures will probably increase the possibilities for SSH-researchers to take part in EU-research, and should not be left untried. But to understand the challenges of integrating SSH-research in challenge-driven research, I think we also need to go beyond the demand side represented by Horizon Europe and look at the supply side, represented by SSH-researchers themselves and their institutions.

A recent call for broad interdisciplinary projects at the Research council of Norway indicates that some of the challenges of SSH-participation may reside in the research system itself. The call in question was open to all fields without any predefined links to societal challenges. We might thus expect that the proposals received reflect the scientific ambitions and preferences for interdisciplinary cooperation held in the community of researchers.

Among the funded projects:

- Only one in four projects go across the STEM/SSH divide

- This means that for the majority of the projects, researchers cooperate within STEM or SSH

- Projects within STEM or SSH also tended to limit cooperation to one research areas like only within the social sciences or only within the life sciences.

If we look at all the proposals, funded and non-funded, we see that:

- STEM-researchers dominate as PIs among both applicants and funded projects. The natural sciences and mathematics are included in 2 out of 3 funded projects.

- Humanities researchers take the lead in only one out of ten of the funded projects and they are poorly represented as part on non-humanities led projects.

- Social science led projects are also quite rare with 7 percent of the PIs, but the social sciences have a much broader representation being present in one third of the funded projects as a supporting discipline.

- Except for humanities-led projects who had a relatively low success rate, the funded projects largely reflect the disciplinary patterns in the proposals

As we can see, the propensity for research cooperation between SSH and STEM fields is low both in proposals and projects selected for funding. This may indicate that some of the challenges of SSH integration actually reside within the research system.

Off course, a single call for proposals in Norway cannot be used to diagnose the challenge of integrating SSH-research in the European framework programmes. Still, our experience indicates that it may not be sufficient that calls are explicitly open to SSH-research. To stimulate the integration of SSH in large interdisciplinary projects, funders may need to engage more actively in the process of project creation through Sandpit exercises[^3] or other experimental selection methods.

## After the funding: Research governance

So what is at stake here? I think we need to accept that the integration of SSH-research in the EU-framework programmes is more about delivering the best and most relevant knowledge for the European societies going forward, then about SSH receiving its fair share of European funding. But I also think that we all can agree that SSH is essential for providing an evidence-base for research policies and for asking the fundamental questions of who we are, where we come from and how we imagine the future.

The introduction of Missions as a new way of governing European research could be seen as a way to capture the public imagination and mobilize citizen participation and creativity across Europe.[^4] As such it the EU Missions should represent opportunities for more SSH-research. Methods such as Foresight has been helping the Mission Boards imagine how the future may evolve and how to shape it.

Research is an unpredictable process, which means that it is always difficult to assess in advance the relevance of a specific line of research for addressing a given societal challenge. Our understanding of the challenge may change underway and the research process may provide unexpected results raise ethical dilemmas. Understanding the processes of research governance is actually a part of the humanities and social sciences. For science to be useful in tackling complex challenges like Climate change, it is vital to understand the cultural and social contexts where research knowledge and new technologies are produced and put into use.

This is why it is so important to include researchers from SSH in all programme committees of the European framework programmes and especially in the governing boards of the new EU missions.

[^1]: European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation: Integration of social sciences and humanities in Horizon 2020 : participants, budgets and disciplines (Publications Office 2020)[ ](https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/141795)[https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/141795](https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/141795 'https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/141795')
[^2]: EASSH: SSH Integration in Horizon Europe and its Missions, January 2022,[ ](https://eassh.eu/Position-Papers/EASSH_SSH_Integration_HEu_Jan2022.pdf)[https://eassh.eu/Position-Papers/EASSH_SSH_Integration_HEu_Jan2022.pdf](https://eassh.eu/Position-Papers/EASSH_SSH_Integration_HEu_Jan2022.pdf 'https://eassh.eu/Position-Papers/EASSH_SSH_Integration_HEu_Jan2022.pdf')
[^3]: [ ](https://www.ukri.org/councils/epsrc/guidance-for-applicants/types-of-funding-we-offer/transformative-research/sandpits/)[https://www.ukri.org/councils/epsrc/guidance-for-applicants/types-of-funding-we-offer/transformative-research/sandpits/](https://www.ukri.org/councils/epsrc/guidance-for-applicants/types-of-funding-we-offer/transformative-research/sandpits/ 'https://www.ukri.org/councils/epsrc/guidance-for-applicants/types-of-funding-we-offer/transformative-research/sandpits/')
[^4]: Mazzucato M, Governing Missions in the European Union (European Commission 2019)[ ](https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/research_and_innovation/contact/documents/ec_rtd_mazzucato-report-issue2_072019.pdf)[https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/research_and_innovation/contact/documents/ec_rtd_mazzucato-report-issue2_072019.pdf](https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/research_and_innovation/contact/documents/ec_rtd_mazzucato-report-issue2_072019.pdf 'https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/research_and_innovation/contact/documents/ec_rtd_mazzucato-report-issue2_072019.pdf')