---
issue: content/issues/HCERES - PFUE 2022.md
keywords: []
date: 2022-05-17T07:30:02.000+00:00
language: English
disciplines: ''
needDOI: true
published: false
article_title: The evaluation of SSH research in European funding – Introduction of
  the moderator
authors:
- firstname: 'Gabi '
  lastname: Lombardo
  positions_and_institutions:
  - positions: []
    institution: European Alliance for Social Sciences and Humanities (EASSH), France
  picture: ''
  picture_copyright: ''
  social_channels:
    website: ''
    wikipedia: ''
    orcid: ''
    linkedin: ''
    twitter: ''
    instagram: ''
    google_scholar: ''
    researchgate: ''
    mendeley: ''
  reference: ''
  is_institution: false
custom_pdf: ''
abstract: "Evaluation of Social Sciences and Humanities in Europe.\nHcéres Colloquium
  Proceedings - Paris IAS, 16-17 May 2022. \nSession 3 \"The participation of SSH
  to European Research\" - Evaluation of SSH in European research programs - Introduction"
picture: ''
picture_copyright: ''
yt: ''
highlight: false
bibliography: ''
doi: ''

---
Horizon Europe will be the largest investment by the EU in science in its history. National governments are under constant pressure to increase the levels of investment in research beyond 2 and even 3% of GDP to support innovation and boost growth. With greater and greater investment comes the need to evaluate whether that investment creates the outcomes that were imagined. Today SSH research is under serious scrutiny from both National and European funders and policy makers and the search continues to identify appropriate ways to evaluate.

There is a new understanding of research, and in particular SSH research, is not just the long held view that science is an engine for new innovation for the sake of economic growth but also for creating societies and communities which take care of citizens’ wellbeing. This is a mantra that SSH research has at its core. All the work of researchers is addressed to understand human and societal conditions and how to design mechanisms to improve them. Science policy makers are finally opening up to new forms of evaluation which looks beyond economic growth measures. The UN Sustainable Development Goals have changed the narrative of the ambitions for science policy makers to look beyond ‘growth’ for what can be achieved with greater understanding of the social conditions.

In times we live in, when democracy and national sovereignty have been challenged and then strengthened by a war so close to European borders and the reinvigoration of a common sense of European values and principles. This comes after two years where our physical and economic wellbeing was threatened by a pandemic which impacted on all aspects of our social and working lives. This is the time when SSH research which can describe and understand the social implications of events is most needed.

While we – members of the SSH community – can feel that the case for investment in SSH research I well made, we still have to confront the challenge to ensure that policy makers have the right instruments and tools to understand and assess research which is both inquisitive and self-reflective of society and capable to deliver crucial evidence for future policies. Also, a science that is a strong companion of other sciences to face our current challenges from many different angles and to ensure that the roots of the issue are deeply understood and addressed.

The European Alliance for Social Sciences and Humanities (EASSH) is today the largest alliance of SSH research organisations and aims to strengthen the interface between SSH researchers and science policy makers. Over the whole period of implementation of Horizon 2020 the Alliance has tirelessly worked for encouraging just and open mechanisms of research call design, evaluation and exploitation of results including social impact both at the European and national level of the policy makers. EASSH has elaborated expertise and knowledge to engage directly with the intricacies of a complicated “machine” which determines today how our research in Europe is funded. In this landscape, EASSH has made crucial recommendations for improving H2020 processes and procedures to ensure that the social dimension is represented when funding is allocated to support research. Furthermore, in this landscape, EASSH has contributed to edit and review the legal text of Horizon Europe and plead with the committee designing the programme to look beyond technological and economic growth towards a more sustainable and human-centric future of our societies.

Horizon Europe today has a domain of SSH research in ERC addressing fundamental research (currently about 24 % of the overall budget), which is as well funded now as it has ever been, combined with a strong cluster in the cooperation programme addressing main issues like democracy, social transformation and cultural heritage (€1.2Bn). The new programme combines with a genuine interdisciplinary approach where research in SSH is understood as a crucial contributor to core research questions, bringing new methodologies and approaches to design more targeted and effective investigations for societal benefits. The work is not finished, EASSH will continue monitoring the implementation of HEu, but it is also one of the few stakeholders at the EU level who participate and contribute to all the major science policy debates. Whether to reframe and review mechanisms of financing research in future, including the European Research Area Forum, the reform of research evaluation, the European Research Infrastructures Forum, and last but not least the European Higher Education Area.

The science policy agenda has never been so rich and open for contribution and the scientific community must be in the driving seat to ensure a fair and sustainable development of new research ecosystems. It is for this reason that EASSH is encouraging institutions, universities, disciplinary associations and think tanks and civil societies with strong research outputs to join the Alliance for a strong and effective voice of our community where it matters most.

I have the great pleasure to introduce the members of this panel because, in different ways, they have been active actors and supporters of a strong SSH research community in Europe. They are also authoritative voices to address the delicate issue of research evaluation and its reform. The panel is made of 4 distinguished colleagues: Jon Holm is special advisor at the Research Council of Norway, Alan Kirman, professor and Director of studies at the EHESS Paris. Helga Nowotny, professor emeritus of Science and Technology studies at ETH Zurich and former president of ERC, the European agency for fundamental research; and last but not least, Marc Vonholsbeeck, acting deputy director general at the Ministry of teaching and research in the Federation Wallonie-Bruxelles.

The panel have four different perspectives, but they all look at the evaluation of research not as a mere science policy exercise as too often happens in policy making, but with a specific look at a compatible and open approach at maximising the potential contribution of the SSH research output for human wellbeing.

The intervention of Jon Holm looks at emerging tools to analyse the impact of different ways of integrating SSH research in funding processes both at national (Norwegian example) and European levels. He focuses on the need to ensure that contribution of SSH research must be identified very early in the process designing appropriate funding mechanisms, also that the approach to monitor and evaluate the results must be included in the programme design and how to continue monitoring of outcomes beyond the period of specific support. He suggests that the relation between societal goals and research priorities is different in each of these phases and the role that collaboration between different scientific approaches play at the different stages.

Professor Nowotny guides us through the ups and downs of the establishment of what is today considered one of the most important funding sources for fundamental research at global level, the European Research Council. She is confident to say that the reason of this excellence is the prevalent concept of Wissenschaft (wetenschap, vetenskap, les sciences) in many parts of Europe as opposed to a new Anglo-American concept of science which has discriminated and privileged a hard science and technology-based approach to scientific investigations. Therefore, today doing science strongly demands “new forms of collaborations facilitated by the impact of digitalisation on the organisation of science. “

These new forms of collaborations are the focus of prof Kirman’s talk. He is reflecting on the fast transformation of scientific discipline, and their methods which in recent years have been profoundly changed by the digital transformation. The challenge though, it is not really focused on understanding what is SSH but rather “analysing the complex adaptive system within which we live \[that\] requires contributions from many disciplines at very different levels from fundamental research to practical and pragmatic measures.” Kirkman proposes to reverse the process of “disciplinary specialisation” and build a common scientific language to a more profound understanding of how different elements in a complex system generate new tracks of knowledge, influence each other and provide innovative answers. In other words, the needs to adopt a really systemic approach.

Finally, Marc Vonholsbeek pushed the terms of collaboration reminding us that Horizon 2020 first and now Horizon Europe encourage an even larger cooperation with academic and non-academic actors, as – especially in the current programme – the funding aims at social impact. A wider interaction between different components of knowledge – from speculative research to practitioners’ solutions, in an open science environment fuel new results. The evaluation then must be adapted not so much to the expert of this or that approach and discipline but to those who can work with others and confidently harvest knowledge for policy making.

These are all wonderful interventions, here reported in full, which drive SSH research and science at large towards new “horizons”.